index: 106
location: 55.868124,-4.287601

# Kelvin Way Bridge

![Kelvin Way Bridge](kelvin-way-bridge.jpg)
![Kelvin Way Bridge Sculptures](kelvin-way-bridge-sculptures.jpg)

Of all the many crossings of the Kelvin, this bridge has the most
chequered history. City Engineer A B McDonald's single-arch red
sandstone bridge was completed in 1914, the same year in which
sculptor Paul Raphael Montford won a competition to produce
allegorical figures for the four corners of the parapet. The outbreak
of war, however, not only led to delays in the production of the
bronze sculptures, but also increased the cost of the works. Over the
next seven years, the artist and the City Corporation -- which had
harboured doubts about the cost of ornamental statuary long before the
bridge was built -- bickered over the overall budget, the many delays
and the release of fees. Ultimately, the figures -- representing Peace
and War (NE), Philosophy and Inspiration (NW), Navigation and
Shipbuilding (SE) and Commerce and Industry (SW) -- were unveiled in
the summer of 1926 to much critical acclaim. In March 1941, however,
the bridge was badly damaged by a landmine during the Clydebank Blitz,
with two figure groups (including _Peace and War_!) falling into the
river. There they remained until 1949, when the City salvaged them and
had them restored by the famed sculptor Benno Schotz. Curiously,
fragments remained undiscovered in the Kelvin until a dry summer in
1991 when low water levels allowed two broken arms (including one from
_War) to be spotted and rescued by passers-by.
