index: 113
location: 55.869546,-4.287705

# Statue of Lord Lister

![Lord Lister Monument](lord-lister-monument.jpg)

[Joseph Lister][1] is famous for the pioneering of antiseptic surgery.  He
worked at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary. He lived from 1827 to 1912.  He
went to University at University College London, one of hte few places
that would accept a Quaker.

Lister championed the user of carbolic acid as an antiseptic. He
noticed that it was used to reduce the stench of fields irrigated with
raw sewage, and didn't seem to hurt the livestock.

![Lister Photo](lister-photo.jpg)

Lister worked in Glasgow until 1869, returning to Edinburgh and then
London.  He is considered to be _the father of modern surgery_.

The statue was created by [George Henry Paulin][2] (1888-1962).  Other
works by Paulin in Glasgow include: _king Robert of Sicily_ in the
Botanic Gardens; Memorial Tablet to Francis Thornton Barrett (1922) in
the Mitchell Library; Sir William Ramsay Memorial Plaque (1919) in the
University of Glasgow main building (Gilmorehill) and Portrait
Medalliions of William and John Hunter (1925) on the Hunter Memorial
immediately south of the University's main entrance on University
Avenue.

[1]: /wiki/Joseph_Lister,_1st_Baron_Lister
[2]: /wiki/George_Henry_Paulin
index: 113
location: 55.869542,-4.287711
tag: statue

# Lord Lister Monument

Seated alongside Lord Kelvin is a bronze monument to Lord Lister, the
Essex-born surgeon and professor whose research into antiseptic
systems revolutionised medicine around the world. In his attempts to
prevent bacterial infections during surgery, Lister's work showed that
carbolic acid (a derivative of benzene) could adequately disinfect
tools and instruments. Although ridiculed at first, eventually his
ideas caught on and soon mortality rates in hospitals dropped by fifty
percent. Lister was primarily based in Edinburgh and London during his
long career, but it was during his tenure as Professor of Surgery at
the University of Glasgow during the 1860s that he undertook his first
experiments with carbolic acid. When the idea of a memorial to Lister
was first mooted after his death in 1912, there were suggestions that
a museum displaying his old equipment in the Royal Infirmary might be
a fitting tribute. The outbreak of war and the subsequent lack of
support from the Infirmary managers led to a revised proposal of a
simple statue, to be cast in bronze by Scots sculptor George Henry
Paulin. The representation of a vibrant Lister, seated atop a grey
granite pedestal, was finally unveiled in September 1924.
