index: 112
location: 55.870552,-4.284892
tag: statue

# Carlyle Monument

![Carlyle Monument](carlyle-monument.jpg)

Across the Prince of Wales Bridge from the anonymous soldier of the
HLI, stands one of Victorian Scotland's greatest men of letters,
Thomas Carlyle. Sculpted out of three massive blocks of grey granite
by Glasgow artist William Kellock Brown, this unusual bust has
Carlyle's head, shoulders and arms emerging nobly from the coarsely
cleft stone. Although the Dumfriesshire-born and Chelsea-based writer
died in 1881, it was not until 1911 that the memorial was commissioned
(and was not unveiled for another five years). Carlyle was one of
19th-century Britain's most influential writers and commentators, best
known for his translations of the German Romantics, his history of the
French Revolution, his biographies of Cromwell and Frederick the
Great, and his essays on Chartism and the Reform Act. Apparently he
had no particular link with Glasgow other than his portrait by
Whistler, whose purchase by the City Corporation became a major
turning point in the struggling artist's career (and a major factor
for the bequest of the bulk of the Whistler estate to the University
of Glasgow many years later). Unfortunately, petty vandalism has been
a persistent problem for many of Kelvingrove's fine monuments; over
the past decade or so, Carlyle's granite nose has been hacked off and
repaired on numerous occasions.
