index: 200

# Kelvingrove Park History

![Kelvingrove Museum](kelvingrove-museum.jpg)

Between 1852 and 1854 the City purchased 66 acres of land forming
Kelvingrove and Woodlands Estates for the sum of £77,945 to create an
area which is now known as Kelvingrove Park. In 1881 a further £66,626
was spent on 19 additional acres being the lands of Clayslaps,
Overnewton and Kelvinbank. In 1904 £11,419 was spent on acquiring a
final 2 acres, being lands at Woodlands Road.

Much of this expenditure was recouped by reserving for feuing the
crest of the hill above the River Kelvin.  Prestigious addresses such
as Park Circus, Park Terrace, Park Gardens and Park Quadrant still
stand as splendid monuments to the Council’s enlightened speculation,
while further gains accrued from feuing a strip 120 feet in depth in
front of Royal Terrace and Parkgrove Terrace on the Southside of the
park.

![River Kelvin by Kelvingrove Museum](river-kelvin-by-kelvingrove.jpg)

The Park was created in the then rapidly growing West End of the city
for the recreation and amusement of the citizens of Glasgow. It was
one of many Victorian parks created in response to the then appalling
conditions created by rapid urban growth resulting from the industrial
revolution.  Kelvingrove Park was laid out between 1852 and 1867.  It
is commonly recognised as the first purpose designed and constructed
park in Scotland and it rapidly became a considerable attraction. As
the Glasgow Green was unashamedly working class, so this new park was
intended to be middle class in its aspirations functions and
surroundings, and the pursuits of its visitors altogether more
genteel. It was originally known as ‘The West End Park’.  The layout
of Kelvingrove was designed by Sir Joseph Paxton, architect of Crystal
Palace and Glasgow’s own Botanic Gardens. His work was received with
great enthusiasm by the City’s fathers and Paxton received two further
commissions – Queens Park in the South of the City and Alexandra Park
in the East.  Thus the hand of one man, with considerable assistance
from the city architect John Carrick, produced the whole suite of
Glasgow’s early Victorian parks, setting a standard for design and
making a mark on the Glasgow townscape as effectively as Frederick Law
Olmstead had in New York and Chicago.

![Joseph Paxton](joseph-paxton-photograph.jpg)

This Sir Joseph Paxton designed landscape is a classic example of a
Victorian Park. Its design and setting on the banks of the River
Kelvin enhance and compliment the many magnificent buildings which
surround it, in particular the world renowned Art Gallery and Museum
which is prominently featured within it. The Park has an over arching
feel of Victorian grandeur. Its layout is said to be in conscious
curves and follows the route of the River Kelvin, which it crosses on
several occasions.

The River Kelvin meanders through the grounds of this park on its way
to a confluence with the River Clyde. The grassy banks and slopes with
their views to the South and West provided one of the attractions
which persuaded the Council to purchase the land in the first place.
The lands purchased for the new park contained several fine mansions
including Provost Patrick Colquhoun’s fine late 18th century Adam
style house which became the first Kelvingrove Museum. On the margins
of the park, the Park Circus terraces and the new University provided
a splendidly monumental backdrop. Kelvingrove is one of the city’s
best loved historic parks, an enduring and much loved legacy of urban
parks from the Victorian era which has a special place in the hearts
and minds of the people of Glasgow. It has twice been used for
International Exhibitions in 1888 and 1901 as well as being used for
the Scottish National Exhibition in 1911.

![International Exhibition of 1888](exhibition-1888.jpg)

In 1888 almost six million visitors attended Glasgow’s first
International Exhibition of Science and Art. One means of access to
the exhibition was by a bridge from Kelvin Way across the River
Kelvin. The bridge’s foundation stone had been laid in 1880 by Sir
William Collins of Glasgow’s great publishing house. Queen Victoria
lent the presents given to her on the occasion of her Jubilee the
previous year and they went on show in the original Kelvingrove
Museum.

The 1888 Exhibition featured 64 acres of exhibits including a replica
of the Bishop’s Castle, built on the slopes of Gilmorehill, just below
the university. The exhibition was opened by the Prince and Princess
of Wales and her Majesty Queen Victoria visited it twice. During the
exhibition, the annual meetings of the British Medical Association,
the British Archaeological Association, the Library Association and
the Institute of Naval Architects all took place in the City, as well
as the 9th Jubilee of the founding of Glasgow University, marking
Glasgow’s new prestige as an intellectual centre.  Glasgow’s
International Exhibition of 1901 was intended to mark the Golden
Jubilee of the Great Exhibition held at the Crystal Palace
in 1851. The 1901 exhibition attracted eleven and a half million
visitors. A major legacy of the 1901 exhibition was the new Art
Galleries and Museum, built facing the University across the Kelvin.
The 1911 Exhibition was on an altogether more modest scale, being
billed as the Scottish Exhibition of History Art and Industry.  One of
the principal aims of the 1911 exhibition was the raising of funds to
endow a Chair of Scottish History and Literature at The University,
which was achieved. The 1911 exhibition managed to draw nearly nine
and a half million people, who came to see a Highland Village and an
old Scottish Town, a Pavilion on Old Glasgow, a West African Village
and among many more exhibits was spectacular access to the university
grounds across the River Kelvin, by means of an aerial railway.
